# A Case for Human Data Science

![Heraclitus](./images/heraclitus.jpg)

***"Machines are becoming smarter. But how can we make humans smarter?"***

This question was the primary driver for me to start Anelen, a data science
consulting and service company. From personal finance to corporate strategy,
every day is filled with decisions. How many choices in life do we make
rationally? Are we learning from past actions and consequences? How is the
collective decision making of humankind improving over its history?

In the last decade, machines became smarter by learning from the data. However,
they are not smart enough for us to be able to delegate everything.
[Reuters recently reported](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-against-women-idUSKCN1MK08G)
that Amazon shut down its project that used machine learning
to rate the job candidates after they found that the model was automatically
downgrading female job applicants. The primary source of such bias was "because
Amazonâ€™s computer models were trained to vet applicants by observing patterns
in resumes submitted to the company over a 10-year period. Most came from men,
a reflection of male dominance across the tech industry."

This news was a lesson for every data scientist. For many people, downgrading
the candidate based on the gender is an obvious flaw of logic. However, we may
easily overlook the problem when our mind is fixated with the framework of
extracting the winning pattern from the historical observation. The case of
Amazon is a warning message to data scientists who think their job is complete
after optimizing the hyper-parameters of the machine-learning model for another
0.5% accuracy against a validation data set.

Machine intelligence at current form, whether it is a supervised or
unsupervised system, only learns from the historical patterns embedded in the
data. Human intelligence at its finest not only learns from the past but also
knows how the future may be - *and must be* - different from the historical
patterns.

***"Helping innovative businesses make smarter decisions with data science." - Anelen's mission statement***

At Anelen, we often make evidence-based recommendations to the top executives
in the client companies. We have the expertise of processing data at volume. We
have the statical knowledge to tell signal from noise. We can operationalize
the machine learning models and deploy them to the production. However, those
are necessary but insufficient requirements for fulfilling our data science
mission. Our work requires empathy for our client's challenges. We need to
understand their core values. We need to share the vision and goals. Only after
that, our analysis and models start to be relevant.

News of artificial intelligence astonishes people every day. People may
think that machines are increasingly replacing us with cognitive tasks. I argue
that humans are far from being able to auto-pilot anything. If you examine what
deep learning is doing today, the majority of the applications are either
low-level cognitive tasks, such as recognizing objects in images or
accelerating "mechanical" decision-making process. I call it mechanical because
those tasks are very well established based on explicit rules or historical
examples with recognized patterns.

High-level cognitive tasks on the other hand often require "fuzzy" human
interpretations of multi-dimensional data. It is fuzzy partly because the
variables of the utility function in our mind is often directly unobservable.
Think of consumer engagement with corporate brands for example. How deeply a
customer's mind is engaged with a corporate brand is not directly observable.
If your responsibility in the corporate was to "deepen the engagements" with
the customers, how would you measure such hypothetical construct? Can it be
measured by the number of posts on Instagram? Maybe. Whatever you choose to
measure, the observable outcomes are not the engagement itself. They are merely
proxy variables that are *assumed* to be the consequence of deepened engagement.
Your assumption may be correct today, but it may a different story tomorrow.
Machine accept the objective function and their variables as is. They don't
question them. This is where the resume classification goes wrong without a
continuous model examination with human eyes.

***"No man ever steps in the same river twice" - Heraclitus***

Humans are capable of realizing that no man ever steps in the same river twice.
The recurring patterns are not the exact replay of the past. History may seem
to repeat itself, but all situations are unique in reality. We are capable of
noticing the factors of the future that changes the historical patterns. We can
question the established methods and decision-making system. Humans have such a
wonderful gift called intelligence. However, such intelligence does not seem to
be utilized as much as it should in everyday life at all levels. Meanwhile, in
the information era, the latest developments are impacting the business bottom
line at light speed. Our cognitive capability is overwhelmed by the
unprecedented amount of signals and noise blended in the vast amount of data.

Today, cutting-edge data processing tools must assist human activities for any
decision-making bodies to thrive. A new discipline must be in place to let us
make smarter decisions at a high pace. It is called data science. The new
discipline owes much to the traditional studies such as statistics but operates
at scale powered by computer science and engineering. It expands our
decision-making capacity with machine learning, but still maintains the
scientific rigor when the hypothesis is generated, the data is collected, and
the bias was assessed. The practitioners of data science must have empathy to
the human value system and ethics. They also master the art of conveying the
message that effectively urges the people to take action.

**This is a case for human data science**, not a blind machine learning
delegation. This is why I founded Anelen.

Data scientists used to spend a long time cleansing data and tuning the
hyper-parameters of machine learning models. Recently, more and more tools and
platforms are becoming available to automate such tasks.  Once we are free from
those tasks, has the role of data scientists over? Far from if you ask Anelen
as it continues the attempt to answer the core question - *Machines are
becoming smarter. But how can we make humans smarter?* - while helping people
make smarter decisions.
