<!--markdown-->
## Re: I Hate Puzzles: Am I Still A Programmer?

![I used to design geometric algorithms](https://farm3.staticflickr.com/2780/4459817401_67071f36fc_z.jpg?zz=1)

My colleague Frank forwarded a blog post titled, "I Hate Puzzles: Am I Still A
Programmer?"[^hemel], which seem to be a very active topic now on reddit.

In the article, Zef Hemel expresses his hatred towards jigsaw puzzles, then 
tells how tech companies overly focus on puzzle solving ability in assessing
engineering candidates. He argues what he does as a programmer is software
design rather than coding complex algorithms all the time.

This is an interesting and important topic to me as an experienced developer at
a product focused startup [^fivestars]. It is interesting to think how one
intellectually get stimulated and engaged in creative processes including
solving puzzle. It is important because of the direct relationship to how we
assess our candidate engineers.

### Many forms of puzzels including product development

There are many different kinds of puzzles...if you take all the things that
"puzzle" us. Hemel first showed jigsaw puzzle. Sudoku and crosswords are other
forms of recreational puzzles. 

My wife used to solve sudoku a lot. I thought it was a waste of my time and brain
power, and I'd rather tried to design an algorithm to solve it automatically.
That is another way of solving the same puzzle. Then, what is the difference
between my wife and I? I only love solving practical problems, not the
recreational ones like sudoku. I also love making a machine that solves
problems instead of solving by hand.

> ## We define a problem and think the best possible solution that not only mechanically achieves the goal but also it is designed so well that people actually use

According to Merriam-Webster, a puzzle is "a question or problem that requires
thought, skill, or cleverness to be answered or solved". In that spirit,
product development is always a puzzle: We define a problem and think the best
possible solution that not only mechanically achieves the goal but also it is
designed so well that people actually use.

I do not like jigsaw puzzles. I do not like crossword puzzles. But I love
another kind of puzzle called product development. Product development is what
we essentially do here in the engineering at FiveStars in collaboration with
designers, marketers, support, business analyst, and sales. We do want to hire
engineers who are great at implementing product ideas that work flawlessly in
scale.

### Finding and assessing software engineers

How do we find such people and how can we accurately assess their potential?

It's interesting when Hemel said,

> Maybe I should refer to myself as software designer rather than programmer.

Notice, if you scan again what I wrote so far, I used the word "design" many
times in the context of solving puzzles already. As experienced software
engineers, you are aware as much as I do that it's almost all about design once
the code goes beyond the function level. Badly designed software is very hard
to debug, maintain, extend, and reuse.

Meanwhile, before I joined FiveStars, I saw many programmers who lacked the
basic algorithm trainings. I always noticed that by reading their inefficient
function-level code. It is clear we need to be good at both algorithm and
design to be a decent software engineer.

I did not go through a computer science education offered in USA, but I observe
that the study is much more focused on algorithm than design in general.
Naturally, I often encounter university candidates whose quickness in algorithm
thinking is much better than I, but clearly I could offer them a lot of lessons
around design. Unless the candidate had gone through a course well designed to
teach software design or systems design, it is not until they build entire
application or work in a team to build the whole software solution that they
start realizing how important design is in software engineering.

### Entry level vs. experienced hires

All these considered, I adjust my expectation levels between algorithm and
design based on the experience of the candidate. If the candidate is just
graduating a computer science program, I'd expect them to excel in textbook
algorithm problems because I do not want them to use the company resource to
catch up on what they neglected to learn what they should have learned at
school. If the candidate has longer career, I'd expect them to be good at
designing larger scale systems while I do not expect them to have photographic
memory of a particular algorithm.

That is not to say that the entry level candidates do not have to develop
design skills, or experienced ones can delegate all the algorithmic thinking to
third-party libraries. I would want young engineers to learn how to design as
quickly as possible. I also think it's a great idea for experienced engineers
to hit the textbook time to time to keep their mind sharp. (I do so when I
prepare for the interviews that I am assigned.)

### Behavioural interview through technical activities

That is why I treat our on-site interview sessions to be more like behavioral
examination while we are engaged in a technical problem solving. Articulating
the thinking process, having good balance between saying and listening,
openness to suggestions may indicate how quickly a young candidate will grow to
be a mature engineer. Experienced candidate may not remember immediately how to
implement binary search without recursion, but I still would like to see them
keep on fighting to solve the problem instead of easily given in just because
they don't recall the textbook answer.

At FiveStars, our on-site interview tries to balance algorithm and design
questions. We also pair-code with candidates, and have lunch together. As a
product-focused company, we are looking for a candiate much better and
all-round than just solving hypothetical puzzles. 

[^hemel]: [I Hate Puzzles: Am I Still AÂ Programmer? -- Zef.me](http://zef.me/3666/i-hate-puzzles/)
[^fivestars]: FiveStars is [hiring](http://www.fivestars.com/team/careers/)! Please find out who we are in [one](http://techcrunch.com/2014/09/25/helping-local-businesses-get-the-five-star-review-fivestars-raises-26-million/) of many articles about us.
