March was Month #7 since Anelen launched in September last year and it was a crazy month. Just to look back, I got the first two clients in Month #2 (Oct '17). I completed the first delivery by Month #4 (Dec). I got fully booked with five clients by Month 6 (Feb '18), and the revenue projection was surpassing previous job's salary. I had no prior experience in starting a business. I simply hit the right market by luck, and it took off.

I got an unexpected high-paying work from the first client in March. I took the gig although I would be overbooked, to be honest. I worked night and weekend to keep all the clients happy because that extra work was going to give me the cushion during my planned "paternity leave" in July.

Now here is the crazy part...I was suddenly introduced to a seasoned director-level executive in a top tier tech giant, and I ended up hiring him! Hiring someone was not something on the horizon at Month #7. I had to quickly decide whether I wanted to take things slowly with enough clients I already had or choose to expand with him. I thought the potential partner was too great of a person to pass and he was willing to take the risk with me. What was the odds for a bootstrapping one person business to meet such a partner so quickly through an introduction?

So, I spent some more sleepless nights to prepare everything to get him onboard. By the end of March, I delivered the work to two clients, started to work with a new client, and made an agreement with the new partner with proper paperwork (He will work with me for up to 3 months as a contractor before we finalize the partnership deal.)

Now I am thinking hard to shape the vision of Anelen. Why did I start this? Where do I want it to go? Is my vision something accepted by the partner and the future employees? I never planned to take it so quickly, but this baby called Anelen is growing faster than I had expected (...or I wished, honestly speaking). I thought I was still testing if the business could survive to feed one family. It started to drive me than I drive it and I am doing this rodeo figuring out on the go. (Sounds familiar, Fivestars OGs?)
