<!--markdown-->

## Back pain, dignity, independence, and technology

Suffering from a back injury made me think of the issue around dignity and
independence in elderly care.

About 5 years ago in Texas, I went out with my friends for a skeet shooting. I
underestimated the weight of the two boxes of the clay pigeons that I tried to
carry, and I hurt my back. I am prone to get back pains since then, and it
happened badly yesterday.

Just getting out of bed to move to the rest room would take more than 5 minutes
as I have to support myself against wall, and examine the level of the pain on
each side of my lower back for each step. It's a horrible thing.

Yvonne has been helping me a lot, and I am very grateful that I have a
wonderful partner like her. Meanwhile, I could totally read her mind saying, "I
cannot stay away because I want to be helpful, but I don't know what to do." as
she saw me moving like a helpless worm on a dry concrete surface. So, I
politely told her that it was best to leave me alone because I knew I could still
do it except that it took 50 times longer time to move my body.

![back pain](https://farm8.staticflickr.com/7524/15954644779_cc841d3891_b.jpg)

I am pretty sure I will recover from this hell in a few days. It got me in the
mood for getting something out of this. I imagined the day I will be very old
and physically challenged as much as I am going through now except that it'd be 
permanent.

I would try to be open for getting help, but I can easily see there will be
moments that I would want to be left alone, after observing myself asking
Yvonne to leave me. It's partly because I want people to spend time for
themselves instead of helping me, and partly because I want to feel that I am
still capable of taking care of myself. That is the issue of dignity and
independence.

One hope lies in the advancement of elderly care technologies. There will be
many forms of assisting machines and robots in the future. Using tools
would not hurt my dignity as much as always having to rely on some other
humans. I'd also feel better not troubling other people so much in conducting
daily activities.
