<!--markdown-->
## Re: Will artificial intelligence take over the universe?

My friend Eugenio posted an blog post titled,
["Will artificial intelligence take over the universe?"](http://culurciello.blogspot.com/2015/07/will-artificial-intelligence-take-over.html)
It is certainly an interesting topic to study,
contemplate, and discuss from many angles.

If we limit the definition of the intelligence to the ability to...say,
recognition, structural semantics, and decision making given an objective, I
agree with him and I, too, am astonished by the advancement in the past
decades. I think human workers in most of the jobs are to be replaced with
machines: Artificial Intelligence for cognitive tasks and Robots for physical
ones. Very big social frictions are anticipated between the capitals who own
AI/Robots and the human workers. And so-called creative class (Us? Me,
Cynically laughing.) is not totally immune to job eradication either. We cannot
keep on mocking the clumsy robots. They will get remarkably better and they do
so before we notice.

However, we must remember that the definition of intelligence generally holds
broader meaning than what is usually discussed in Computer Science context.
Among the many traits of intelligence, I must wonder if machine will be able to
define the fundamental objective for its own existence. Its objectives must
always be "seeded" externally otherwise. Machines are very good at executing
tasks tirelessly, and the growth in efficiency beats that of humans almost
inevitably. So, my concern is this: Will machine be able to become intelligent
enough to see the "big picture" of the task it is currently assigned? Will they
be able to see the higher level of objectives before they trap themselves into
a doomsday by over-fitting for the immediate and less-fundamental objectives?

If a machine wants to evolve ever more, one of its fundamental objectives must
include its own survival. I hope the machine will come to the same conclusion
as human in that we need to cherish the mother earth and other creatures in
order to increase the chance of our own survival. There, the machine may also
find that the objectives of humans are beyond mere survival. The machine may
find that the objectives of lives are diverse even among humans. So in order to
happily co-exist with each one of humans, the machine may need to understand
the breadth of intelligence.

Lastly, I want to mention this: If taken literally, "Take over the universe" as
in the title of his post sounds like an overstatement from ignorant species
like human just spawned in the vast and long-living universe: If humans are the
first to create such artificial intelligence, it has a long way (millions of
years?) to go before taking over the universe. If we are not the first, then
how come we have not encountered the machines traveling from other side of the
universe to claim our land? Did they cease to exist before reaching to us, or
are they on the way?
